---
domain: rfc.tango-controls.org
shortname: 10/RequestReply
name: The Request-Reply protocol
status: raw
editor: 
---

This document describes The Request-Reply protocol. The Request-Reply protocol provides a two way in which the Tango 
Controls clients and servers communicate with each other.

See also: Y/OtherTemplate

## Preamble

Copyright (c) 2019 Tango Community.

This Specification is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public 
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later 
version. This Specification is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY;
without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public 
License for more details. You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with this program; 
if not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses>.

This Specification is a [free and open standard](http://www.digistan.org/open-standard:definition) and is governed by 
the Digital Standards Organization's [Consensus-Oriented Specification System](http://www.digistan.org/spec:1/COSS).

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", 
and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## The Request-Reply protocol Specification

The Request-Reply protocol defines:
* types and content of messages sent between Tango Controls objects,
* communication sequences,
* rules for establishing and tearing-down network connections.

### Goals

The Request-Reply protocol aims to standardise way of exchanging data between Tango Clients and Device Servers in 
a pattern where a client sends a request and the server reply with an answer. It SHALL allow for reading and writing 
Attributes and Pipes as well as for executing Commands.

Additionally, it aims to:

* Be independent of network transport/binary protocol,

* Define a rules for transparent reconnection,

* Allow for initiation and management of other communication protocols (like Publishe-Subsciber protocol) .

### Use Cases

There are few main use cases for The Request-Reply protocol:

* Calling Commands on Devies,
* Reading Attributes' and a Pipes' values and meta-data,
* Writing Attributes' and Pipe's data,
* Setting-up Publisher-Subscriber communication,

## Specification

### Client duty
#### Reconnection
TODO Describe here how to check the connection and in which condition should the client reconnect

### Version compatibility
TODO describe here in which condition
TODO decide which version the specification should focus on i.e version 5

### Protocol
#### Message
SHOULD include:
* client process idendification i.e pid
* source

#### Exception

Certain conditions may prevent a Request to be handled properly.

* If a Request cannot be handled properly, the Client SHALL be notified by receiving of a DevFailed or MultiDevFailed exception (see [9/DataTypes.md](/9/DataTypes.md#Exceptions)).
* The DevFailed exception MAY be generated by either a Client (API) or a Device Server.
* Exceptions MAY be rised either by API code or by a user provided code.
* The Request Reply Protocol SHALL provide mechanism of sending a DevFailed or MultiDevFailded exception from a Device Server to a Client.
* If a Device Server throws a (Multi)DevFailed excepiton upon request processing, the exception SHALL be sent to the Client which sent the request.
* If a Client receives a (Multi)DevFailed exception it SHALL be available (rethrown) to user (code).

* The Request-Reply protocol SHALL implement Transparent Reconnection mechianism on the client side. Transparent Recconection is hidding temporary connection issues by re-trying of connection establishement. In such a case exception throwing 

* The Client MAY opt-out from using Transparent Reconnection.

#### Timeout
#### Synchronous request
#### Asynchronous request
TODO understand the PUSH_BACK model. CORBA or more generic?

#### Cache

#### Serialisation

### Blackbox
A blackbox system should record every REQUEST on the Device especially:

Attribute case
* Read Attribute request,
  Should register the attribute name, the id of the client (often the pid), the version of TANGO and the Source (DevSource)
* Write or WriteRead Attribute request,
  Should register the attribute name, attribute value (only for writing?) (AttributeValueList_4), the id of the client (often the pid) and the version of TANGO
* reading an Attribute configuration # (Op_Get_Attr_Config)
* changing an Attribute Configuration # (Op_Set_Attr_Config);
* Read the Attribute History 

Pipe case
* Read Pipe request,
  Should register the pipe name, the id of the client (often the pid), the version of TANGO and the Source (DevSource)
* Write Pipe request,
  Should register the pipe name, attribute value, the id of the client (often the pid) and 0?, the version of TANGO_PIPE? 
* WriteRead Pipe request,
  Should register the pipe name, attribute value, the id of the client (often the pid) and 1?, the version of TANGO_PIPE? 
* reading an Pipe configuration # (Op_Get_Pipe_Config_5);
* changing an Pipe Configuration # (Op_Set_Pipe_Config_5);
* Read the Pipe History 

Command case
* listing the list of Command Name [//]: #  (Op_Command_list);
* execute a Command Name
Should register the command name, the id of the client (often the pid), the version of TANGO and the Source (DevSource)

* any operation like reading the request of Command History [//]: #   Op_Command_inout_history_4,

Operations case:
* reading the BlackBox itself #  (Op_BlackBox);
* reading the device (Attribute?) name # (Attr_Name)
* request the adm_name attribute # (Attr_AdmName);
* request thedescription attribute # (Attr_Description);
* read the information of a device command  # (Op_Command);
* read the information of a device # (Op_Info);
* executing Ping # (Op_Ping);


NOTE All GROUPED REQUESTS should be logged once with the same information as the unique request

### Connection management

* The Reqest-Reply protocol SHALL manage client connection.

#### Connection establishement

#### Serving multiple devices 

#### Serving for multiple client connections

#### Staled connections

#### Transparent reconnection on client side
